# Fragments — Complete Text

> ⚠️ This file is auto-generated. Edit the individual files instead.


## The saltshell

THE SALTSHELL

"...While there is little factual evidence to support the existance of the Saltshell as a genuine relic, the numerous references to it in surviving myth are enough to make speculation about its necessary properties more than an exercise in idle musings. For if such an object were to have ever existed, the ramifications to the field of biology alone would shake that noble field of study to its very core, not to mention a complete revision of meteorology and theology.

However mundane or miraculous, we can begin to sort through the varied accounts and build a composite description from the historical record. To begin with, we can surmise that the Saltshell as described was never intended as a human tool. We know this because all known sources pointedly remark on the punishing discomfort imposed upon those who have used it. The manner of its use requires that wearer insert both hands into the device and contort the fingers in a most unnatural fashion. The object then either seals or clamps around the wrists such that the tips of the fingers within are decidedly ruined. Exactly how is still a matter of speculation. In the more familiar epic, this takes the form of small thorns that catch the hands in a pinch. However, there are known variations to the tale that refer to fishhooks or "shark teeth". These variants originate along the more coastal areas, possibly reflecting the important fishing traditions there.

One theory is that the device was intended to fit smaller, more slender digits, or perhaps those bearing extended talons such that the catching of the fingertips becomes more a matter of close-fitting contact for the purposes of efficient tactile feedback than a means of torturous operation on fleshier human hands. This of course presumes a manufactured origin.

The next point of consideration is the nature of the shell itself. The descriptions vary but tend to fall into two distinct groups with isolated exceptions. The major description, particularly along the seacoast and those deeper inland along rivers leading to port, is that the shell is in fact the remains of a sea creature much like the common nautilus. The lesser description, more prevalent in the isolated mountain provinces and in other wooded areas where logging replaces fishing as the main industry, is that the shell is all that remains of a large extinct form of snail. The primitive nomadic peoples of the Southern Wastes are unique in that they refer to the Saltshell as a magical ram's horn (the "Bitter Horn"), yet in function and all other characteristics this local relic resembles the Saltshell and so does not merit further distinction.

The tendancy to relate the shell to a more locally familiar analogous object is interesting, and perhaps the truth of the matter is that the shell/horn is an intermediate mix of all known descriptions.

All accounts mention a widening spiral that leads to the twin openings for the hands. And the defining similarity is that the shell itself is made of a cloudy, dense, crystalline salt which does not melt. It is unclear exactly how the shell functions, for there is no meaningful agreement among the various sources. Some stories describe the shell simply as a means to shackle the violently insane, specifically those possessed by occult forces. Other tales refer to it as a "water shaping" tool useful for anything from catching fish to battling whales to smoothing away tidal waves. It is apparently also useful for dowsing and rainmaking. In one instance, the wearer was able to determine the truthfulness of those who spoke in her presence.

All this is severely taxing upon the user who is quite trapped within the shell anywhere from a few hours to several days. During this time, the blood from the user fills the spiral cavity inside. At some point the shell releases its connection and the user is able to withdraw his hands. It may be that the blood itself triggers this. If the device is purely an inert object, perhaps the accumulation of blood disrupts some inner mechanism. The wounds sustained by wearing the Saltshell are unanimously described as maiming and disfiguring; more than a few of the myths make poetic use of this by having the wearers be artisans of some sort, or dancers, and thereafter unable to follow their trade. By contrast, the scars themselves are apparently quite beautiful and are seen by many as an honorific consolation for the mangled hands. In some cultures during times of festival, parents will mimic this scarring pattern on the hands of their children using stains and other pigments to temporarily mark the skin. These designs vary, but are always elaborately detailed..."
## The girl and the tower

THE GIRL AND THE TOWER 

Sometimes, when passing through the lowest level of the tower, she would stop there in the middle of the floor and look up into the great hollow shaft to where the Witch was known to reside in a chamber at the top. Round and around her eyes would follow the rising spiral stair. Sometimes smothered in gloom, it clung as ivy to the curving stone wall. Sometimes it was illuminated by shafts of light from tall slits in the masonry.

These slim windows were regular and narrow, intended for defensive archery - yes, all that she knew well; quite clever, and so on. And yet the charm of these slivers of light and breath was not simply from this heroic application, but because through them, at regular, radial intervals, you could see higher and loftier views of the castle grounds.

Then, nearing the trapdoor in the furthest reaches you might even begin to see beyond the castle walls, perhaps even as far as the Lake Beyond the Briars. Might and perhaps. Since she had never dared the stairs that high to see for herself. They were old, wooden and wormy. It was not that she was afraid of heights, nor concerned about the lack of a railing; she was a reckless child. In fact, she would have gathered her skirts and hopped up the walls like a monkey, side to side, if the tower were only narrow enough.

No, she was not afraid. If anything the decrepit and dizzyingly, inherently hazardous nature of the tower, with its elegant swirl of rotting timber and teasing glimpses of what the hawks must see, was keenly attractive on the whole... except for the chamber at its peak where the Witch was known to reside.

From her vantage far below, she could only dimly find the floorboards to the room capping the tower. Occasionally at night, curious and violent scuffles sounded down to her. She would then feel as though she were down a covered well, looking up through the tarry void at the gleamings of light through the floor that made her ceiling. With held breath, she marked the time between such muted crashes and the soft touch of dusty silt upon her nose; dust that drifted down to her upturned face as powdered sugar on gaudy cakes.

That was night, when the Witch was active. Now, during the day, sunlight pierced the tower through the thin windows and made straight golden blades of shifting liquid light in the air. She had seen a trick once (and just a trick; it was not magic - not real Magic, she knew even then) that involved a box with narrow openings all over, like the tower. The trickster hid inside it. He invited those watching to jab scimitars into this box while he groaned and chortled and carried on in a most amusing manner. In the end, the box bristled with blades, and it looked plainly as though he must have been run through by at least a dozen wicked points, and yet he expressed none of the agony one would expect. Her sister, older and wiser, spoiled this delightful display by leaning over and saying, "He's quite flexible, I've seen him through the keyhole with the maids. He is dodging these blades in ways you can't imagine, but that's all there is to it."

She looked up now, with the setting sun skewering the tower, and she pictured a giant crowded inside with her. His head would go into the Witch's chamber. His body would flatten and curl like a serpent to avoid the cutting light.

The two times that she dared climb the spiral she was frightened off by the Witch. Once, at night, she felt surely she could approach under the cover of the Witch's usual ruckus. And yet, just as she was starting to see the peaks of the castle wall outside, the noise above stopped entirely. And it was a keenly predatory, listening silence; the severity of it, the sudden abruptness, startled the girl into fleeing down and around and out of the tower, without a backward glance. In such a silence, her own pounding heart and ragged breathed resounded as though she were screaming her fear to the heavens.

And then once, during the day, when the high chamber was quiet (as usual, for the Witch was sleeping), she crept up to that same spot on the stairs and dared a step further. The cautious daylight calm then broke with such sudden thrashing about from above that the whole tower itself shook and threatened to topple down about her ankles. Needless to say, she turned tail and lit out for safety.

So after those two attempts, she contented herself with her ground floor view and the lower windows on the stairs. As for the Witc