A BRIEF TALE OF PLENTY 

Once upon a time, deep in the woods under towering trees, black with damp bark, there sat a small village of mice. It was a quiet place for quiet lives; safely tucked away in the thickest, darkest, most serene spot in the forest.

The mice there never wanted for anything. For surrounding their village, dusk and dawn, were nut trees and berry bushes and grasses heavy with dew.

The village was called Plenty, and its citizens were happy indeed. All, that is, except for one small boy of a mouse, named Stem.

Stem didn't much care for the quiet serenity of Plenty. It was boring. Nothing ever happened that didn't happen the day before. He went about his chores with a wayward eye into the gloom of the surrounding forest and the promise of a larger, more exciting world beyond.

"I'm going to leave this little knothole," Stem would say, "Someday soon." And he meant it.

"Me too," would say his little brother, Twig, who thought that Stem was the greatest person in all the world.

"Eee-doo," would say their littlest sister, Pollen, who learned that she had toes just a few days ago.

Mother never let any of them leave Plenty, however. She warned them about the Dangers of the Forest. Things like Owls and Ferrets, Foxes and Snakes - monsters that ate stray little mice, whiskers and all!

Unlike his siblings, Stem wasn't afraid of monsters. He was skilled as a warrior and practiced his swordplay everyday after finishing his chores.

"I am Stem the Mighty," he would cry, before charging into battle, "Har!"

"I'm mighty, too," would cry Twig, his squire.

"Eye-dee-doo!" cheered Pollen.

The monsters always begged for their lives, but Stem was merciless.

"I bet my trusty sword and I could make the Forest safe for all mice!" he boasted.

"And my dagger!" agreed Twig.

"Why, we'd be doing the village a favor if we went out and made all the Owls, Ferrets, Foxes and Snakes leave for good!" said Stem.

"Yeah, we'd be heroes!" agreed Twig.

"Beedy ear-ohs!" agreed Pollen.

And so, the three fearless warriors decided they would save the Forest - after lunch and maybe a nap.

The tendancy to relate the shell to a more locally familiar analogous object is interesting, and perhaps the truth of the matter is that the shell/horn is an intermediate mix of all known descriptions.

All accounts mention a widening spiral that leads to the twin openings for the hands. And the defining similarity is that the shell itself is made of a cloudy, dense, crystalline salt which does not melt. It is unclear exactly how the shell functions, for there is no meaningful agreement among the various sources. Some stories describe the shell simply as a means to shackle the violently insane, specifically those possessed by occult forces. Other tales refer to it as a "water shaping" tool useful for anything from catching fish to battling whales to smoothing away tidal waves. It is apparently also useful for dowsing and rainmaking. In one instance, the wearer was able to determine the truthfulness of those who spoke in her presence.

All this is severely taxing upon the user who is quite trapped within the shell anywhere from a few hours to several days. During this time, the blood from the user fills the spiral cavity inside. At some point the shell releases its connection and the user is able to withdraw his hands. It may be that the blood itself triggers this. If the device is purely an inert object, perhaps the accumulation of blood disrupts some inner mechanism. The wounds sustained by wearing the Saltshell are unanimously described as maiming and disfiguring; more than a few of the myths make poetic use of this by having the wearers be artisans of some sort, or dancers, and thereafter unable to follow their trade. By contrast, the scars themselves are apparently quite beautiful and are seen by many as an honorific consolation for the mangled hands. In some cultures during times of festival, parents will mimic this scarring pattern on the hands of their children using stains and other pigments to temporarily mark the skin. These designs vary, but are always elaborately detailed..."