The Manticore Prince (Part 1)

"Look dear boy, from one to another, all I'm saying is that these bristly creatures of yours, delightful as they appear, would hardly be considered useful combatants in any but the most lascivious of struggles, and need I remind you that our collective enemy has no such weakness for quaint notions of the flesh. Our esteemed adversary is not a man of secular - that is to say, [i]carnal[/i], leanings."


Folimari finished his dismissal with a long draw on his pipe, a slim ivory affair, etched with arabesques and butterflies; he arched an eyebrow. He felt the eyes of the other two seated at the table, spectating this exchange across it. The four of them were playing cards, yet the game proceeded unremarkably as the real sport lay in these conversational volleys.


Across from him, young Joyce rolled his eyes. He folded his cards together and seemed fit to sputter, his boyish face reddening by the second.


"Carnal? But it's not like that at all! How can you say that? These are monsters, not concubines!" He shook an accusatory finger at Folimari, who managed a supreme blink.


To Joyce's side Helmson nudged his elbow, "Easy now, Joy. He didn't mean it like that. I wouldn't call 'em concubines. Right, Sam?"


Sam jumped in his seat from a swift boot to his shins, "Oh yeah, yeah. To'ally not concubines, no, not at all. You 'ave to be female for that." He then yelped from another strike below the table, "Ow! Well, it's true! Concubine is the girly word for it. I mean, more proper it'd be concubinus, for the male." Sam pronounced the last part bye-nus, then caught himself, unsure. He said it again as bee-nus. He then grinned broadly with sudden insight, "Oy, that kinda rhymes wif penis, don't it? Yeah, now that makes sense-"


Helmson roared, "Oh, shut up, Sam!"


"Well, they are all male, innit?"


Sam hooked his legs to trap Helmsom's boot this time and the two almost upset the table with a brief bout of foot wrestling.


Joyce put down his cards, standing up from the game. Still glowering, he pulled his gloves from his sleeve and threw one into Folimari's face. The other almost fumbled his pipe.


"That's it, Folimari - I'm tired of your smarmy quips. I challenge you!"


"Hold on, Joy." Helmson reached for Joyce's shaking slim hand, pulling it down.


"No, let him speak," Folimari placed the glove before him neatly and he tapped out his pipe, tucking it away. He did not rise from his seat, and the smirk on his face might have been cast iron. "Let the boy speak."


By now, the others Dreamers in the salon had paused their light socializing to also watch the spectacle. Canny, wily, grizzled Folimari having his conversational way with a young turk was hardly a novel sight, but to have it escalate so quickly to a duel was notable enough to silence the room.


Joyce startled at the silence and looked about, suddenly uncertain of his outburst. He was the youngest here, not in actual age, but as far as the game was concerned he was still a child, and as the newest member of their clutch he had found nothing but polite condescension despite all his efforts to be accepted.


Mostly, however, he resented Folimari's smug gaze at each turn. Joyce's every utterance and genial attempts were met with the same withering stare that seemed to hollow out his spirit and to poison his thoughts. He swallowed down the dry lump in his throat.


"At least I'm trying to do something about this war - something useful."


"By creating an army of supple daydreams? Those frail creatures?"


"They are manticores, similar to the sphinx. They originate from Persian myth and are thought to have first evolved from fanciful descriptions of Indian tigers. Their name means man-eater, and-"


"I don't dispute their pedigree. Your creative skill and taste is as impeccable as it is personally revealing. But my boy, have you seen a battlefield? The forces we face are brutal, severe, and cold. What you've sighed so beautifully into being may suffice as guards for harem duty, but the engines of our enemy will not pause in grinding them into a regretful paste." Folimari struck the table with a fist, but then smoothed his fingers over the surface and waved his hand limply.


"Besides," he added, "we already have our army. Several, in fact. The Matriarch and her kin do our bidding; our allies surround us; our cause is in the best of hands." He nodded, as did those near him in agreement.


"But we have no forces here, what if-"


"We need no forces here; we are here. Here in our domain we can unmake this world if need be."


"That would not seem like victory to me," Joyce said.


Folimari narrowed his eyes in silence. He tapped a finger on the glove, on the table.


"Your challenge, boy?"


"I propose that we do not sit here in our fanciful comforts while others do our killing for us. We can build and form miracles, we should be doing so in support of this war - our war. Not just leaving it to mercenaries and hapless allies."


Joyce turned to the others in the room, meeting their impassive regard with a hand to his chest, "I want to feel like my efforts matter, like my life matters. I thought that's what you people were about. That's why I wanted to join you. I didn't realize that the grand revolutionary society of Dreamers was simply a ... a hobby. Doesn't anything mean anything to you? I built something to fight with, something honorable, and all you can see is weak psychoanalysis and another knife you can twist in my side-"


"Your charm is wearing thin, young Joy-"


"Let me finish!" He pushed the table against Folimari. He was verging on a tantrum, but he couldn't help himself. He didn't care. "Let me finish, old man. I challenge you to a duel. One of my creatures against any one the Matriarch can spare to you to prove its worth in battle."


A murmur rippled through the room, folded fans snapped open and fluttered, hiding whispers. Some held up clever glasses on stems to record this for later amusement.


Folimari flung the glove back across the table, and he shook his head.


"No. I reject your challenge. While it is true that our forces are sound, and the conflict goes our way, it is only because we leave the warring to warriors. I will not start sapping our strength just so you can have your adolescent display. If every downy neophyte wanted to try their creations against that which protects us, then we might as well all carve the sign of the vanquished onto our faces, right now! You forget yourself, young Joyce; no one cares for your outrage nor your passionate opinions; we all have opinions here. And your raw skills which have impressed us so to this date will not serve you in the future, if you cannot find a way to fit them into our way of life."


Joyce realized then what it was, what it had been all along.


"My raw skills? You're jealous. You're jealous, aren't you?"


"Idiocy, my child."


"No, I'm right, aren't I? You're afraid that I could do something meaningful, more than frippery and masturbation. I challenge you more directly then: my creation against one of yours. Surely what we do here will not tilt the balance of power in any remote battle."


"If you win?"


"If I win, you will support me before the council when I present my plan for the mass production and delivery of manticores to assist the Matriarch and her generals. Or at the very least, you will get out - and stay out - of my way, when I show what they can do; when I beat you."


"And if you lose?"


"If I lose," Joyce licked his lips, "If I lose, I will leave the clutch. I will leave this city and seek the comforts of the nearest dragon."


Folimari smiled with openly wicked delight.


"Before all these honorable and kindly people, I accept your challenge. Sort out your creatures as you like. Tomorrow I will come to your studio to select one of your fine specimens for you and to inform you of my own champion. We will meet a week from today to settle this, in the Tlachtli Court."


Only then did Folimari stand. He extended his hand across the table, his nails glittering and gilded, "Agreed?"


Joyce hesistated for the space of a breath before he clasped the soft flesh into his own. Folimari's hand felt as cold as the grave.


"Agreed."


* * *


The Vicar's spies, Black and White, together watched this unfold with clear and untroubled lenses. Of one mind, they wordlessly split up so as to follow both Folimari and Joyce. Black passed through soot and shadows, sly as dander on wedding veils, he trailed Folimari through the warren heart of the Dreamer capital, and he was not discovered. White slipped through milk and gaslight, as ghostly and intangible as funerary condolences. He lit after Joyce through all that sparkles, and he was not seen.


Yes, even here in the great lotus Alexandria, the city of promise and the stronghold of Dreams, the Vicar's men were about their business.