The Manticore Prince (Part 2)

Long before Alexandria was Alexandria, the Lotus City of Dreams and Knowledge, it was Rhakotis, a small historical footnote of a fishing village from pharaonic times, known only by the particular lead in the mud of Alexandria's harbor to have existed at all. This is truth and fact, look it up if you like. If nothing else, Dreamers value a grounding in mingled truths for all their best works, and their capitol city ranked highest among their achievements.


From any point along its streets you only had to look up to see the towering Lighthouse, there in the bay. Taller than the Pyramids, taller than anything else in the ancient world. In truth, the Lighthouse of Alexandria toppled completely due to a series of earthquakes several thousand years ago. Although had it stood, it would have remained the tallest structure in the world until the 14th century. In one truth, that is. The Dreamers collectively restored the Lighthouse, elaborating upon the idea of a light rising from the deep. It now rocketed solid stone from the churning surf, high almost through the clouds. It was encrusted with additions and decoration, personal embellishments and the trappings of pride and vanity.


It grows even now, higher still, seething out tendrils of bricks and mortar, with frescoes and turrets, architecture upon architecture collapsing into itself only to resurge higher in buttressed leaps that each year are a little more gilded by the sun, as closer to heaven it strains from the ocean floor. Its height is bound only by the unfailing tendency of Dreamers to eventually bore of even their most precious creations. Construction continues via a few dedicated souls, but for the most part, the Dreamers of Alexandria are content with the mass of stonework on display. It is no longer all that fashionable, frankly.


But it was also never practical, for the other core feature of the great towering lighthouse, aside from its dizzying height, is that it must surely fall. By definition, the Lighthouse of Alexandria, is both enormous and also scattered in ruins along the ocean floor. This is how it ends, this must be how it ends: there will be an earthquake, or two, and the tower will crumble back into the waves. And oh, won't that be a riot of cataclysm! Yes, as certain as the tides, it will fall, for that completes its nature.


Just as the Tower of Pisa will conversely never fall. It may lean and sway, it may sag in eternal exhaustion, but it can not be allowed the rest of the grave. The Dreamers would not permit it, because it is the nature of the Leaning Tower to lean. It will have no respite, hanging from the noose of its essential quality, eternally. And even should it fall by some queer event, it will not fall. It will remain forever the quirky destination of gaudy tourists. Subjected to cameras, I will forever be the star of hokey photographs of people pretending to push it over, or pretending to hold it up.


It could drop into rubble tomorrow, and that would not change the fact that it will never drop. By the same token, Alexandria's beautiful spire is doomed by design. The Dreamers know this, and there is only so much nihilism a creative soul can take before it tires of such affectation in favor of sex or rainbows or good food. So eventually most of the Dreamers moved on to other things, and they will only return their attention to the Lighthouse when the trembling earth finally shimmies it down low.


After the Lighthouse, there is the Library, of course. But it too is a doomed and haunted place for all its flash and grandeur. All of everything that can be known is there. The source of Dreaming and the crossroads of this world with yours, and with others. But it is fated to burn, and this is well known. It is the end of civilization waiting to happen, waiting for the match and the right gust of wind; some careless toss of sparks and a little willful seasalt air...


However so well known is this eventuality that it bears no more attention.


Of the three wonders which fulfill Alexandria the last are the Catacombs of Kom el Shoqafa, which means "mound of pot shards". It is so named for the numerous graves, piled and puzzled together. But it is not merely the compacted strata of corpses that is notable (for mass graves are commonplace throughout time). No, it is the craggy landscape of headstones and tombstones, crypts and funerary urns, plinths and obelisks and busts and coffins, stars and crosses and moons and stupas and cairns upon cairns of dead brute legacy. It is where death itself comes to die, making a kind of mulch of these carved ceremonial trappings. A junkyard of remembrances and epitaphs from every age and empire.


Perhaps more fitting than "a junkyard" would be to call it "a reef", for a reef still lives and thrives though the coral structure might be dead bone. And in the great graveyard of Alexandria it is observably thriving like perpetual Spring. So densely "populated" is it that should even a small fraction of its markers be gifted with a single lily, the eyes would dazzle from all those slender pale trumpets flecking the grounds as stars across a clear night sky. Flowers upon flowers, dutifully left at each grave, adorn this strange landscape, creating rolling hills of somber slate and marble that are lush with every colored petal you imagine.


And not just flowers, but trinkets and keepsakes, bowls of rice with incense still smoking over the grains, nutshells, keys, old photographs and love letters, rosary beads, autographed baseballs, bronzed baby shoes, loops of hair tied with small ribbons, trophies, newspaper clippings, little patriotic flags, and tiny bottles of whiskey. The mournful giftgiving ranges from the most Egyptian in material splendor, to simple kisses in lipstick, layered thickly on oft caressed granite.


Picking about this place, life also lingers in the form of an endless procession of mourners, some still fresh with grief, others long used to the notion of loved ones gone and still gone, still. These come with chairs to sit and talk for a while. Some bring their families to dig up old relatives and dead friends, to have a picnic with them as though hardly an hour had passed from one last breath to the next.


It's not all joyful bittersweetness, however. You would see just as many arch enemies come to gloat, just as many debtors come to verify the deceased, and orphans at the end of long, sad trails. In fact, the whole spectrum of life, of living itself, seemed to gather and concentrate in this place. If you stood still long enough, the tombs would soon surround you, as more were always in the making, but beyond that you would see before you every possible human emotion and motive and urge and consequence play itself out, there among the dead.


The necropolis of Alexandria was a world unto itself, endlessly churning and frothing up life and death, and barely contained within the elaborate wrought-ironwork that fenced the perimeter.


There is more to say of the Catacombs of Kom el Shoquafa, specifically of the subterranean labyrinth, the Hall of Caracalla. But this tour of the city's highlights was only by way of stalling the narrative. See now how early we have arrived the next day, here outside Joyce's studio. The streets are still mostly empty and blue-grey with pre-dawn light. Too early for anything of substance to have happened yet. Just stray dogs sniffing about the front steps, streetsweepers brushing by. A taxi hurtles over a steaming manhole, pulling sewer vapor with it.


There is nothing going on as the city still sleeps. It is a city of artists and Dreamers, and so the waking world will be put off for as long into morning as possible, which gives us time for such tourism. But there, see now who approaches, gangly Sam with his dim, slack face, and rounder, stocky Helmson. Bundled into thick coats against the morning air, they step in unison to the front of a plain brick building.


"This is it, here." Helmson nodded to the doorway. Beside it listed the occupants; no one of any great regard, particularly among Dreamers. This was a low rent area, more impoverished than would even be fashionably Bohemian. Joyce was not so far up the social ladder, nor in his career, to afford better.


Sam peered over the directory list, pointing across the names with his finger and saying them to himself.


"'Ere he is, should I push it, then?"


"No, you idiot. You'll wake him, if he's sleeping. Or disturb him, if he's not. I know if I had Folimari on the way, I'd be busy dusting and cleaning and resetting my booby traps." He turned the collar up on his coat and hunched deeper into his stout shoulders.


"So which'uv us is it, again?" Sam asked, sucking his teeth in thought.


"I told you: we were there when it happened, so we are going to be their seconds. You will assist Folimari, and I will assist Joy."


"But I don't fink I much like Folimari."


"Watch your mouth, Sam. And it's only because Joy needs all the help he can get that I offered to be his second for the duel."


"Well, right, but I don't see why I couldn't've been paired up wif someone else, 'at's all I'm saying."


"There is nobody else. Though perhaps if you hadn't been such a fool with your con-cue-bee-nis that might have changed your lot."


"Speakin' uvvit, y'know, 'Elmsie, the plural would be concubini. Inn'at sweet?"


Sam turned to an invisible bystander and theatrically bowed with exaggerated deference, "Pleased t'meetchoo, might I present my concubini for your pleasure? 'Ave a go, right?"


"You really are thick, Sam."


Sam chortled, pleased with himself and paying no mind to Helmson's weary glower. Sam put a lanky arm about his friend's shoulders, "Alright, alright. So what we doin' anyway - I means as seconds."


"It means that we attend and witness the duel, and make sure there is no cheating involved. If our charge loses in an unfair manner, we are there to, well... administer justice, as it were."


Helmson waved his hands as though shaking off something distasteful.


He shrugged and continued, "It's not something I'm happy to have been drawn into; this will be a nasty bit of business, I expect."


They were both quiet after that, and little by little the light began to change. Dawn broke fully upon the distant harbor and the great Lighthouse, which could be seen over the skyline for miles, suddenly seemed cast in burnished copper, circled by slowly curving gulls.


Above them a large window canted out from the side of the building, accompanied by the vigorous turning of a rusty crank. Joyce thrust his head into view, his hair disheveled, half-naked in his boxers. He smiled broadly, though he looked groggy.


"Helmson! Sam! I thought I heard you two down there. Just a minute and I'll buzz you up."


He popped back in, and Helmson turned to Sam, "You stay out here, now. You should wait for Folimari to arrive and come in with him. Until this blows over, we can't be so chummy, understand?"


It was clear by the sudden look on Sam's face that he did not understand, or rather, he did now and with obvious dismay.


"Wait, what?"


The buzzer sounded, and the front door clicked itself unlocked. Helmson squeezed Sam's shoulder and looked him in the eye with as warm a smile as he could for his friend.


"I have to go, I'll see you inside in a bit. Lucidity."


"Lucidity," Sam weakly returned the traditionally formal farewell. He looked to the doorway long after Helmson had entered.


* * *


Inside, it was a quick rickety rise through a cage elevator to Joyce's loft. The young man threw open the freight doors and welcomed him in with an embrace and a cup of coffee.


"Helmson, good to see you. Here, have this, you'll warm up. I'm barely up myself, so I only just turned the heat on; it will take a while for the radiators to kick in." Joyce seemed manic, walking about back into his apartment, leaving Helmson at the door to shrug out of his coat and find some bare place to set it.


Joyce lived the life of many new Dreamers, young and single, committed to his work and craft. It was a standard trope with a long and solid tradition behind it. He wasn't exactly a starving artist, but he played it pretty close to that bone. Perhaps he worked as a waiter somewhere.


From the vast room Joyce clattered and bustled about, "Come see what I've been up all night finishing."


Helmson had not visited Joyce at home before. Most Dreamers tended to meet at the various salons and card games, gallery openings and so on about the city. And it had been many years since his own beginnings, so he was not quite used to what he considered the squalor of Joyce's working environment. Half-formed pieces littered the room, works draped in sheets, or shoved behind folding screens hung with kimonos. Broken, forgotten bread on platters next to empty wine bottles. It was somewhat at odds with what he had assumed he would find; he half-expected Joyce to be obsessively organized. Helmson ventured a few steps further into the dim room. Though a wall of windows faced the street, heavy closed curtains blunted the light down to gloom. He could hear Sam outside pacing in the gravel.


The building had been some kind of warehouse or factory, or it was at least modeled after one. To be honest, it was rather cliché.


Joyce returned, only slightly more put together: stuffed into trousers and a t-shirt. He had run water through his hair but left his cheeks as they were, roughened overnight. Perhaps this was calculated; Folimari would be impeccably groomed.


"How's the coffee?" Joyce looked to the mug in Helmson's hand. He handed it back to him.


"I didn't try it. I'm fine. Here." Joyce took it and sipped immediately. Helmson licked his lips unsure how to begin.


"Listen, Joy. I hope you understand the seriousness of what will happen today. Of what happened yesterday. And not to mention, what will happen six days from now!"


Joyce nodded openly, but didn't respond. His mind seemed to be racing and elsewhere.


"Joy, it's not too late to reconsider. I could try to smooth things over with Folimari. We could find some compromise with your work that-"


"Helmson, my friend. Let me show you where things stand with my work."


He led him deeper into the apartment; he apparently had the whole building floor to himself, perhaps even the whole building, come to think of it. So much of what Dreamers surrounded themselves with could not be known with certainty. Joyce seemed to present himself in an old artist mold: as the gritty young upstart with talent and passion who would thrive in such surroundings. Perhaps it helped him score romantically.


They passed through a dark area of large shipping crates, arranged to form a kind a room within a room. Stark lamp lights flooded this inner space with a clinical, diffuse glare. The floor was cleared down to raw concrete, around the wooden crate walls sat low, rolling carts of various tools.


There in a crisp line-up, as though waiting for just such a display, were his manticores. A half dozen of the creatures each sitting in a peculiar squatting crouch. They did not move, eerily so - that was the first thing that occurred to Helmson now that he was seeing them in the flesh. No softly drawn breath, no pulsing of blood through thin skin. Their tails curled precisely and did not twitch in the least. They could have been statues. As he approached, he noticed a rush of sensations: a low electrical hum in his ears, the hairs on the back of his neck lifting in static repulsion, and the metallic tang of ozone in the air. Overwhelmingly, however, was the distinct aura of raw dry heat emanating from their bodies.


Helmson caught himself holding his breath and he gasped, drawing in a rush of hot air. He looked to Joyce, but the young Dreamer had his coffee to his mouth, momentarily obscuring his face.


Helmson swallowed thickly, "Are they... are they alive?"


"It's hard to tell, isn't it?"


Helmson waited for more, but Joyce said nothing else. He took another step closer and the sensation of heat rippled over him again. The creatures radiated it like unbearable bonfires. The air around them shimmered and Helmson soon found it hard to breathe.


He had to look away and cough for breath, "God, how can you work so closely? The heat!"


"Mm, yes."


He wanted to touch them; the urge was irresistible, and he turned to face them again, his throat and lungs stinging now, his eyes watering. He crept as closely as he dared, and when the heat forced him to stop he reached out a trembling hand, his shirt sleeve smoldering visibly.


Joyce had to pull him away, "I wouldn't do that. Easy now, come here."


Helmson blinked, startled and disoriented. He put his hands to his face, then drew them away sharply.


"Ah! I'm burned!"


"Only slightly. Here, slather this on. You'll be fine." Joyce wheeled over a cart and handed Helmson a bottle of sickly smelling lotion.


The young man's demeanor was now curtly clinical. He watched Helmson closely, lifting his face gently into his hands to look directly into Helmson's eyes, one at a time.


"How do you feel? Dizzy?" Helmson frowned and stepped back. He looked to the creatures, to the bottle in his hand and to Joyce.


"Why? What just happened? What did they do to me!"


Joyce still regarded him as though he were under glass. He advanced onto Helmson and a light flickered in his eyes that unmistakably belonged to a curious child with a scalpel and a pickled frog.


"Proximity to them induces an accumulation of beta amyloid peptides in the brain, which is the central event triggering neuron degeneration. An accumulation of these aggregated amyloid fibrils are believed to be the toxic form of the protein responsible for disrupting the cell's calcium ion homeostasis: it induces programmed cell death, or apoptosis."


Helmson felt a shiver up his spine, ice in the pit of his belly.


"What!"


"Believe me, I had not planned for it, but they seem to eat holes into your brain, causing a form of Alzheimer's. I haven't finished my testing yet, but the process accelerates exponentially the closer you get. Had you actually touched them, I suspect your cranium would now be filled with soup."


Helmson staggered backwards, bumping into a cart and setting it rolling and clattering. Joyce reached out to keep him from falling.


"Relax. I'm sorry. Helmson, relax. It's nothing. Nothing more than what a pint of ale would do you, just feels like a hangover, right? And besides, you didn't touch it. You didn't come close enough. I know what you're feeling - I've felt it myself."


"Get off me! You fuck, that wasn't funny."


Joyce laughed musically, with a touch of mania. Helmson rubbed the bridge of his nose and walked out, back into the more domestic quarters of the apartment. Joyce trailed after him, still chuckling.


"Hoo, but you should've seen yourself. I can't wait for Folimari to arrive. Had you going, mm?"


"We fight clockworks and automatons. Your creatures won't be able to rot brains the enemy do not possess."


"My creatures... my man-eaters, can do more than that. As I mentioned, that was an unforseen side-effect, a passive feature."


"What other 'passive features' do they possess, Joyce? Should I check myself for tumors, a third eye in my throat? You are reckless!"


"They're more impressive in person, aren't they? Not just etchings in the salon. And what you saw are merely the early models, I'm working on some prototypes now with a Voudoun angle, the brain scrambling brought zombies to mind. You know that they're poisonous as well? And with teeth like sharks." Joyce curled his fingers before his mouth to imitate fangs.


Helmson had the distinct impression that he needed to leave, right then, right there. The boy gave all indications of the classic Dreamer archetype, one that had not been seen in such full flare in ages. He was brilliant and poised to self-destruct somehow: very likely at the hands of his greatest creation.


"Joyce, you do know where this is going, don't you?"


"Well, Folimari-"


"I don't mean that - to hell with him. I'm talking about you. What you're doing here will consume you. I don't know how. But that is your fate. This is an old, old tragedy."


The buzzer sounded. Voices murmured outside. Folimari had arrived.


Helmson could feel his window of opportunity to exit the narrative neatly passing. He would bear witness to this all, now. What had been anger and outrage now slipped smoothly into pity and duty. He was Joyce's second, and he would look out for the boy as best he could - that was his responsibility.


* * *


The arrival was decidedly awkward and chilly. At Helmson's prompting, Joyce made Folimari and his entourage wait while he cleaned himself up a little more.


The old Dreamer looked more grizzled than ever. In the salon setting, Folimari's 18th century acidic mandarin shtick was flawless. Here in recognition of Joyce's more modern, urban neighborhood he chose to embody a Warholian vibe. Understanding context was a key attribute all Dreamers possessed to some degree, and Folimari was a master of character according to setting and setting according to character.


Folimari wore a severe outfit of black on black with only his fingernails colored, his hair in aggressive white shocks. He wore sunglasses and he did not remove them. Once inside, he did not respond in the slightest to Joyce's surroundings. His thin lips did not smile. He indicated for one of his followers to hand over something, and Helmson intercepted the gesture, taking what resembled a small black cube. It was a Rubik's cube as it turned out, but black on all sides.


"It's a puzzle. Feel free to solve it when we leave, if you'd like to see what you'll be up against. Call me if you need any help with it. There, I've shown you mine. Now you show me yours."


Joyce led them into the back room. Helmson chose not to go, not to see the creatures again. As they filed past him, Sam brought up the rear. Neither Folimari nor any of his accompanying eye-candy acknowledged Sam at all. Upon catching Helmson's gaze, Sam grinned goofily and winked, whispering far too loudly, "Psst, 'Elmsie!" He mouthed the words, "I am Folimari's second!" and then flashed two thumbs up as the happiest extra in the school play.


Helmson needed fresh air. He took the cube outside with him. Folimari's sleek black limousine waited near the door, the engine still running and a burly chauffer standing by it with hands like fat hams. He regarded Helmson disdainfully.


Helmson went for a walk around the block. He felt something on his cheek and brushed at it without thinking; wisps fell away. It was his skin; it was peeling as though from sunburn.


* * *


More and more as the day took shape, the neighborhood became increasingly like mid-1980's Manhattan as needed. He ducked into a coffee shop and sat with a cup by the window in wan grey daylight. The radio in the place played something era appropriate.


A ringing in his ears that begun after seeing the manticores still troubled him, along with a throbbing ache in his temples. He kept checking for nose bleeds, and he picked at the dead skin peeling from his cheeks. He stared at the Rubik's cube and his coffee.


Helmson was not terribly gifted as a Dreamer; he had no high ambitions, and he added little to the great works of Alexandria. He was content to do his small projects and to serve as a foil for those more capable - even Sam, who was more talented in his idiot savant way.


He did not anticipate being involved in these kinds of narratives, and he was not sure he liked it. Would he alone survive to tell the tale? Or would he be the one whose demise galvanized a heroic surge in others during the last act? It wasn't clear and this troubled him.


It troubled him so much that he did not notice the Vicarial spy hiding in plain sight within the black of Folimari's cube.


* * *


The spies, both Black and White, met within Joyce's apartment and swapped information. It was decided that White should stay while Black followed the cube. The harsh lighting of the Dreamer's studio afforded more opportunity for White to move unrestricted. Black flashed from clothing to limo to coffee to cube and now looked up at the sad, lonely face of the aging Dreamer. It recorded everything into transmissions directly to the Vicar himself. It scanned Helmson the feeble Dreamer not only visually, but for more intimate details, seeing in his face a life spent hewing away at mediocrity in solitude. A life lived with only enough understanding to recognize how little he understood. The Black spy streamed through all the angles of the cube, within and without, checking for where to spring to next. It was also aware of other options in passing, surfaces dark and shadows darker. It then saw a way into Helmson himself, as his spirit slipped into a foreboding as complete as an eclipse. It was there that Black took up residence, hiding in the freshly formed lightless pits of Helmson's brain, mere pinprick spaces, microscopic holes newly made by a close encounter with manticores.