The Manticore Prince (Part 3)

The puzzle to Folimari's Cube was almost complete, and yet


* * *


Sam clutched at Helmson's charred remains, kneeling with them in his arms and sobbing, shaking with grief. There was no other sound, beyond his cries. All had paused to watch in stunned silence, even the air was still. He rocked back and forth with the smoking bones, smudging his cheek to them and sniffling low incoherent mumbles.


In the middle of the scorched playing field, this tableau held for minutes, seemingly drawn out into hours, days even, before Folimari breathlessly raced across the pitch, pushing past Joyce. The old Dreamer dropped next to Sam and struggled to pull him away from the body.


Joyce broke from his stupor and whimpered pathetically, "It's not my fault. I didn't know-"


He turned to any who might face him, seeking recognition, some form of forgiveness and escape from this smothering shame. No one met his gaze, he felt as though he were drowning.


"I didn't know. I'm sorry."


Slowly, the crowd began to rustle with whispers, and there rang out a hiss, then a boo of disapproval. Useless betting vouchers flew and fluttered from all about the stadium.


Soon others arrived to the field, medics, police, even some members of the council. Joyce was roughly pulled aside, and he didn't resist; his head hung limply to his chest.


As he was ushered past, Sam looked up through teary eyes, and his face contorted with a dramatic, profound awfulness from sorrow into a blind and bloody rage.


He spit, struggling to get up as Folimari restrained him.


"You!" His raw swollen eyes bulged with emotion, and he shrugged off Folimari as though shedding his skin, emerging larger somehow. He dropped dead Helmson to the ground and rose as a dark wave cresting, taller and bonier than ever, his hair wildly writhing like some soft sea creature. He lurched a step forward, then another, breaking into a run after Joyce.


"You!" He howled again, his mouth hanging open, his teeth flashing.


One of the escorting officers turned with raised hands.


"Sir, stay back and let us han-"


But Sam's face opened six different ways into lively wet matter that flowed around the policeman, pulling him apart as easily as runny eggs. Sam did not slow his charge, scooping up and through the obstacle. Sam's flesh bloomed about in wild arcs, consuming and erupting with the urgent, crashing violence of a waterfall. From his skin, slavering wolves surfaced then submerged, followed by a thousand tentacles wielding a thousand crude blades slicing the air, and then hands upon hands reached for Joyce with knuckles sprouting fingers sprouting talons sprouting scorpion stingers and fish hooks on fire.


He sheared through the other officer with an exaggerated gory splatter, like a special effect done with buckets and an excess of pig's blood. Sam had now spiraled into a maelstrom of flesh and destruction, spewing hatchets and missile swarms and volcanic geysers of acidic radioactive piranha harpies, lightning in all directions.


There was chaos in the stands. Sam rampaged for several days, all-consuming and unstoppable.


* * *


Helmson clutched at Sam's charred remains, kneeling with them in his arms and sobbing, shaking with grief. Again the coliseum heavy with silence, again comes Folimari knocking Joyce aside.


Helmson looks to the old Dreamer, his face broken with pain and sorrow.


"My friend, my sweet Sam. Sweet child, Sam."


Folimari knelt and embraced both him and the body.


At some point Joyce scuffled by in the custody two legionnaires. Helmson struggled impotently in Folimari's arms, yelling after him, "You! It should have been you - not him! Not my Sam! Folimari, let me go!"


"We have him, Helmson. He will stand for his crimes."


"No, it is not enough! It's not enough!"


And as it turned out, it wasn't. At the trial, his defense attorney made the case that Joyce was not mentally fit to be held to full account for his actions. He was said to have suffered considerable brain damage due to working so intimately with his creations, which were revealed to be toxic.


Convicted of some lesser form of negligent manslaughter, Joyce was remanded to therapeutic custody for treatment and further evaluation. The case was closed, Sam had no living family to appeal. The remaining manticores were destroyed, the war continued and Helmson spent the rest of his days frequently visiting Sam's grave and telling him the latest salon gossip. At some point in his old age, Helmson commits suicide on New Year's Eve.


* * *


Sam spilled over out of the arena into streets lined with the most experienced and martial Dreamers, they intended to try and contain him. He was now monstrously huge, gouging craters of asphalt into his mouths and pulling down the masonry and steel from the buildings as he passed. He was still thrashing in full tantrum, and all that he touched seemed only to feed his anger and strength. He spread like wildfire, reducing the city to rubble from one block to the next. Nothing they did seemed to have any lasting effect as he simply absorbed or negated anything directed to him.


It was only when it seemed that he might reach the Library did the council realize just how serious this was - not just a ruined neighborhood, not just a natural disaster, Sam had become a vast singularity of wanton calamity. Should he reach the Library, it was not clear what would happen. It was a gateway, as well as a repository; would he pass through it? And if so to where? And if he added to his being all that the Library had to offer, he would certainly become as a god, churning as Azathoth in the void.


The Dreamers were not quite ready see that narrative through.


* * *


Convicted of some lesser form of negligent manslaughter, Joyce was remanded to therapeutic custody for treatment and further evaluation.


Years later Helmson began to visit him regularly, apparently at peace with the past and gaining the trust of the staff until one day, Helmson swipes a sharp pencil from a lax attendant and repeatedly stabs Joyce in the neck, claiming vengeance through clenched teeth and spittle.


Years later Helmson visited him, having reached some inner peace over the situation and still feeling responsible for Joyce in a faintly paternalistic way. He said that it was too much to lose one friend, and that he was not willing to lose another.


Years later Joyce was delivered a noticed that Helmson had died, succumbing to brain disease brought about by his brief exposure so long ago.


Years later Helmson goes to visit Joyce and is informed that he has passed away, by complete chance and accident, he is told.


* * *


"I give up, Joy. I can't see a way to solve this. And we're almost out of time, the duel is soon." Helmson let the black cube tumble between them onto the table.


Joyce stirred sugar into his coffee with grim solemnity, "He's just trying to intimidate me."


"And you aren't intimidated? These all seem like perfectly credible outcomes to me." Helmson shifted uneasily in his seat, "And I have to say I'm not happy with how many of them see me dead. You're the one who challenged him."


Joyce picked up the puzzle box and turned it about in his hands. He twisted one side, and then another at random, "There has to be a solution in which Folimari loses, or at least suffers. He's barely affected in any of these, so far. Do you think he rigged this thing? Are these all preset outcomes?"


Helmson shook his head, "No, that would be crass. Folimari would not load the dice, as it were. He's too much of an egotist to cheat. That's what worries me; I don't particularly enjoy unhappy endings."


"His Dreaming is so complex. I wasn't expecting it to take this form."


"What? You thought just because you tinker so literally, that he would follow suit? Joy, he deals in concepts and abstractions, Folimari's Dreams are highly complicated existential metaphors. Truthfully, as clever as you are about your business - he outclasses you. I was frankly surprised that you challenged him; he was right about your creations, you know."


"But I thought all Dreams had form. There's a war going on right now, a real bloody conflict against a tangible enemy, how else should we fight it?"


Helmson, shook his head and reached for the cube, taking it.


"I don't pretend to understand how it works fully, I'm not as metaphysically capable as some. If anything, I'm a literal thinker like you. I make things, practical things. Like this."


Helmson pulled from inside his pocket what looked to be a large magnifying glass, though it was pierced through the center of the lens with a rotating dial that bore several smaller lenses of different colors, some stacked within stout metal cylinders. He held it up to Joyce and looked through it with one eye, now suddenly huge and blinking.


Helmson adjusted the device and squinted at the target.


* * *


The band, Folimari's Cube, had been touring cross-country for six weeks now, playing every other night at some new bar or local venue. The group dynamic was beginning to fray around the edges. Too many nights of long driving and sleeping in short shifts. Too many nights living out of the van - or more to the point, the van and Dave's fucking drum kit. But the van belonged to Milt, and Dave and Milt were brothers. There was no way around it: the Cube would have Dave as the de facto drummer for its entire existence. Or at least until they got a new van. Then maybe they'd fracture, have some sort of falling out over the cash split or some girl. Some boy. Milt was a fag, he would tell it to you himself.


It was in his lyrics, in the leer he saved up like gargled lung butter, drawing it up deep from within when they pulled into some mid-west hick town and he sudden turned it on for the truckers and the regulars. He was a 1000% gay then, like a zillion kilowatts of sodomy and he prowled those flimsy honky tonk stages and he stared down those men in cowboy boots, he pointed his love songs and lusty anthems past the girlfriends and waitresses. He licked his lips and teeth like fangs while his moronic brother Dave banged out the most mindlessly basic of beats, always with the same trite fill, always with same pit-pat cymbal crash at the end of each song.


"Fuck. Milly, man. I like the song - but fuck, man - get Dave to close it with something else. You're singing songs about blow jobs and angels and he plays the same way for both. It's just fucked stupid. It makes everything sound the same. He plays everything with the same goddamn four bars."


And that's eventually how they talked, even with Dave right there to hear it to his face. Because it only mattered what Milton thought; Dave was his dog and his brother. And I say eventually because at first it was cool; the shine of the tour was still bright. If there were problems, they'd work it out on the road, man. Like, this was finally the shot they needed, and it just took doing a few gigs to hammer out the kinks.


But Dave wasn't just a kink. And his drums ate up the space in the van; there was never anywhere to stretch out and smoke, or a place to fuck the groupies. The van could be obviously rocking on all fours, lit up with weed and sweat and semen and next thing you know there's Dave banging on the back door because Milt says it's time to break down the set and pack up for the road. And it's like, dude - Dave, you dumb shit, it can wait 20 minutes.


A couple weeks of this and a drum machine starts to look pretty good. A couple of weeks and the rancorous divide only deepens. Ray had his bass, and Ty could fake the rest with his synths - they plotted mutiny, hunched over eggs and cold diner coffee.


"Man, fuck this. Milly's never gonna kick him."


"I know."


"And if it's not Dave with his drums, it's Milly himself. That cocksucker-"


"Dude, chill with that. I don't have a problem with the gay thing."


"No! I have two fucking stitches on my forehead from a beer bottle! And how're your ribs, huh?"


"Pfft! Whatever man. You know he got it worst outta all of us that time-"


"I'm just saying I'm tired of going to these places and Milly's practically giving out lapdances, to these freaked out hillbillies, and then we get our asses kicked."


"That only happened twice, Ray."


"Two times two goddamn many, if you asked me. Which he didn't. Which he doesn't. He never asks anybody anything. He just does whatever fuckall thing first comes to his brain."


"Look, dude can sing. And maybe not all the crowds get his songs, but you see how well we play in the cites. Fuck these little truck stop shows, what's gonna make us big are the city gigs."


"I got songs, Ty. Me. What about that? He never wants to sing my shit. I gotta beg just to warm up the crowd. What about that, huh? You know - you and me, we could take my songs and-"


And just then the door to the diner opened, jingling the tacky ornamental sleigh bell and plastic holly tied to the handle. The two marginalized band mates glanced to the entrance along with the rest of the patrons. Just a fleeting thing. You have ears that work and eyes that register and you look to the noise and the motion around you. Nothing extraordinary about that. But the glance lingers and what catches the glimpse holds the gaze like some kind of tar baby.


In walked this gruff thug in a leather jacket, sounding his boots heavily, behind him followed a small, wan woman with ratty hair and sad, nervous eyes. One of her cheeks was yellow and mottled where the last echo of a bruise was just starting to fade. This new couple could not be more clearly understood by all in view. The woman did not stray beyond arm's reach; though man did not touch her - did not, in fact acknowledge her presence. Yet she was as clearly tethered to his being as though bridled and bound. He walked deep into the seating, passing empty tables and booths, only stopping when he reached the back. He slid into the far seat, with a clear vantage of the room. She took the chair facing him. He sat upright, legs spread, his hands as massive as stones and just as coarse with visible calluses.


Ty peered over his shoulder briefly then sipped his coffee. He wasn't going to stare. Ray was not so reserved, "Ty, you see that? The big guy?"


"Yes, Ray, I saw 'em come in, just like you did. Stop gawking. I don't feel like catching a beat down for free. Typically we play the music and get paid for that first, right? Isn't that what we were talking about?"


Ray seemed not to hear him, steadily stealing looks over to the back table. He cut and ate his eggs on autopilot, gesturing with his fork.


"What do you bet he works her over regularly?"


"Oh, you figure that out all by yourself?"


"You think she likes it?"


"What?"


"You know," Ty shrugged his shoulders and tipped his head about, "likes it. I mean, fuck, why stay with a monster like that?"


"Maybe she's afraid to leave. Maybe it's love."


Ray shook his head, "Dick of gold, eh? Is that it?"


"Ugh, no. That's not what I meant - you know what? I'll be in the van ... with Idiot Dave the Bongo Monkey: apparently the only other one on this tour who can go five minutes without referring to penis."


Ty skittered a crumbled bill onto the table, "That's for the coffee. Don't take too long, alright." He left, knocking his fist against Ray's shoulder brusquely.


"And seriously, Ray, stop staring."


* * *


Ty picked out a cigarette and lit it just outside. He blew smoke and yawned. There in the parking lot sat the biggest, blackest car he'd ever seen. It wasn't there when he came in - it had to belong to the goon with the punching bag. He checked around and walked over, ambling. It was hissing, still ticking and hot from the road. Something dark and watery with an unhealthy sheen leaked into spidery rivulets beneath it. He walked around to the back, and was surprised to see no vanity plates, just a nondescript tag from a couple states away. Where were they going, or coming from, in such a burnout hurry? There was no indication of make or model on the car, no manufacturer's name plate. The hood bulged like tight metal jeans, and Ty caught himself thinking this.


He spit out the last of his smoke and walked over to the parking lot for the bar next door; last night's venue. Their van bristled with tinny AM radio noise. Dave sprawled in the driver's seat, drumming his sticks on the steering wheel, lost in a groove. He saw Ty approach and he grinned, nodding.


* * *


On the road, the four got along as usual. Milt took the first shift driving. Like his brother, he was animated and manic. But that was because he'd scored some form of sex last night. He had the charisma and recklessness for this to happen regularly enough. Even in these unenlightened corners of the world, Milt was able to find some closetted, self-denying cock to play with. Dave sat with him up front and they talked about something from their childhood. Ty tried to sleep. Ray plucked at his unplugged bass, working out some dubious riffs. They were less than ten miles out when the big black bruiser-mobile roared around them and ahead into the distance. Milt arched an eyebrow.


"That guy is either compensating for a particular shortcoming, which would be droll and unsurprising, or he's gifted enough not to mind that he looks like he's compensating." His wry sneer belied obvious mental wheels turning.


Dave had to reason this out, "You mean like guys that wear pink?"


"Something like that, baby brother."


Ty squinted past them to the receding dark vehicle, like a roving shadow in the broad daylight, a hurtling sunspot. He grunted groggily and slumped back, "Forget it Milly, if that's who I think it is, Ray and I saw him in the diner with his girlfriend or something."


"Ooh, what'd he look like?" Milt leaned onto the pedal every so slightly, accelerating. Ray paused his noodling and chimed in with a snort.


"Oh, that dude? Yeah he's serious business, alright," Ray returned to his bass picking, watching his fingers. He was quiet for only a moment, then, "Ty, man, you missed the show after you left; I didn't tell you. So yeah back in the diner: the guy's just sitting there, big as Mount-fucking-Fuji, and his girlfriend suddenly goes to get up - like to go to the bathroom or some shit. And I'm thinking - well, you remember what we were talking about right? So I'm just busy thinking and drinking coffee-"


"What were you talking about?" Milt looked at them both in the rear view mirror. Dave turned in his seat to listen-in, a dim smile on his face.


"Nothing, just guy talk," and then back to Ty, who still looked like he was snoozing, eyes closed, "So I don't even notice until he says - loud enough for everybody to hear - he says, "Heel. Quiet" Just like that, can you believe it? Like to a dog or something. And she's half out of her seat, and people are looking. I'm looking. And she just sort of wilts back down. It was fucked up." Ray is laughing now and Milt looks irritated, his attention split between the road and the rear view mirror.


Ty manages a shrug, "Yeah, so? We figured he was abusive, right."


"No, no, man, that was just the start. So then this other guy, just another customer, he's with his buddies and so he says, loud too, something like "He should pick on somebody his own size." And they just grumble. It's like three dudes in a booth. And now everybody is hating on this prick. Staring daggers, right?"


Ty illustrated this with pointed fingers from his eyeballs, zinging them in Dave's direction.


"So was there a food fight or what?"


"See, I'm thinking: if there's a fight, or something gonna go down like that, I'll just bust out on the bill during the melee-"


"Ray you're full of shit - "melee", my ass. There wasn't any fight. I was right outside smoking. I would've seen it through the window."


"But that's just the thing, man. It didn't happen because she defused that shit in a hurry. She said," and here Ray licked his lips lightly, "She said: You boys mind your business. My husband is on a mission from God, and I am his hound. I will bite what needs killing and hunt down the coon through brushfire."


Ty opened an eye and looked askance.


"The fuck out of here, she did not say that. Nobody talks like that."


"She said what?" Milt asked, speeding the car faster along the little stretch of road.


"I swear on my Mother's grave that's what she said: mission from God, and she was his hound."


The van jostled along the road a little further in silence after that for only a few seconds, then Dave started laughing. The rest of them joined, because it was clear that Dave had no idea what was funny about what was said. It was his goofy ignorance they found amusing, and a welcome diversion from thoughts of the inexplicable insanity of the world.


* * *


Helmson cast down the cube in frustration and disgust. His fingers ached. His own mechanical dreamings did little to expose Folimari's construction, only enough to show that it was much more complicated than it first appeared. Joyce had been watching him expectantly and it was obvious that he wanted to ask him questions. Helmson removed his elaborate spectacles and the various lenses folded neatly away into each other, compacting down to practically nothing. He rubbed the bridge of his nose and frowned.


"Don't look at me like that. I know what you're thinking. Well, I should say: I know partly what you're thinking. I can't fully know, because you're a genius. Folimari's a genius. Even Sam in his way is a genius. Most everyone I know is a creative luminary, except for me. Your way of thinking is beyond me. I can't decipher it, and I can't decipher this." He limply pointed to the cube, black as ever.


"But what did you see? Was it about us? The upcoming duel?"


Helmson sighed and shook his head, "I don't know. I don't know what I saw. I told you, Folimari does not Dream so concretely as you or I do. He does not make things. For all your promise and potential, you have not fully elevated your skills into the conceptual. You can form wildly imaginative Dreams, yet they are so literal. You build monsters, Joy. But that's all they are, mere monsters."


"I make life," Joyce quipped, visibly bruised. Helmson rolled his eyes and sat up, "Yes, yes you do. Don't take my words the wrong way, my friend. Please don't misunderstand me. You do imbue your work with uncanny, credible, vitality. But you've had your turns with this puzzlebox by now, you do see that Folimari operates on another plane entirely. He plays with realities, not life." Helmson almost said: "not just life," but thought better of it as the words tumbled from his mouth.


"So? What do his visions matter unless they take tangible form? And if and when they do, then my living dreams will be on an equal footing."


"You still don't understand. You think too literally. There is abstraction to consider. Metaphor and grace. These are sources of power that you do not dabble in."


Joyce seemed petulant. It was clear that he wanted the satisfaction of seeing Folimari suffer at the hands of his beasts. It was also clear that such an event was highly unlikely to occur. This situation would never even get that far, or in such a form.


"Well, can you help me?"


Helmson, sucked his teeth and shrugged.


"I can try. That's my duty. Ultimately though, you will have to face this thing alone." He glanced down at the cube, "I may be able to make a few devices that could help you to see what he's doing, even if you can't understand what you're looking at. In the most technical terms, Folimari's dreams are concerned with semiotics; a field of study you would do well to learn more about. It is made up of three elements: semantics, which is the relationship between signs and the things they refer to, syntactics, which is the relationship of signs to each other in formal structures, and pragmatics, which is the relationship of signs to their impacts on those who use them. I may be able to help you to recognize syntax and to boost your pragmatic competence, but as for semantics - which is the most critical of the three - I can do nothing for you, as I struggle to grasp it myself. The others can be quantified to a certain degree, and devices can be made to help in assessment."


He stopped talking when he noticed Joyce wasn't listening. The boy was out of his depth.


"He's going to make a fool of me, isn't he, Helmson."


Helmson did not know how to respond.


* * *


Within Helmson, the Vicar's Black Spy peered out from one iris, then the other, observing and recording and transmitting. As the night fell, shadows lengthened and deepened. It would be able to move about much more freely at night, though the inky, petroleum black of the cube still registered high on its list of optimal havens. The spy saw the visions inside it, both first hand and through Helmson's eyes. The box was extremely prescient, more sensitive to narrative than perhaps even its creator could understand. It had picked up signals from beyond its realm, but the clues were lost on Helmson. Only Folimari himself might recognize the extra material, additions to his creation that he did not intend.


The Vicar would be pleased at the information, the open evidence. He does not deal in obfuscation, all his plans are bare and discernable. Indeed, such is his goal for all things: to be plainly understood. Alexandria would be struck down to smoking rubble, the heart of their power fallen even as the Dreamers overwhelmed his martial forces elsewhere along the front line.


    Turning and turning in the widening gyre

    The falcon cannot hear the falconer;

    Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;

    Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world,

    The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere

    The ceremony of innocence is drowned;

    The best lack all conviction, while the worst

    Are full of passionate intensity.


    Surely some revelation is at hand;

    Surely the Second Coming is at hand.

    The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out

    When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi

    Troubles my sight: a waste of desert sand;

    A shape with lion body and the head of a man,

    A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,

    Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it

    Wind shadows of the indignant desert birds.

    The darkness drops again but now I know

    That twenty centuries of stony sleep

    Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,

    And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,

    Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?


* * *


The Vicar's Man-o-War has his hand tangled in her hair, his other is a closed fist - as it has been for the last hour, unclenched and busy. It reels out with the thrown punch and recoils, leaping away from him again and again, striking into her face. And then once more into her face. Again into her face, and then again. His knuckles are broken and they both look like travelling reddlemen, covered in blood that is equally his and hers.


She gurgles implausibly large glossy bubbles from the swollen pulp of her mouth. Her teeth are gone except for the molars, those dug in too deeply to be knocked loose just yet. Without a doubt, there is severe brain damage. One eye is punctured. Both lenses detached and useless. She hangs limply from his hand in her hair and barely twitches with the blows, reflexive spasms making her fingertips wiggle every now and then. His split face is neatly divided in contrast to the wet mess of her own. His whale sounds swoop low into meditative, long drones and subsonic trills below the loud and steady thud of meat onto meat.


He had pulled over the car to idle by the roadside, cut the lights and taken her head into his hand for this very thing. They drove all day, and were soon to arrive, but the events in the diner could not be excused. His has was broken now; he would find it difficult to control the steering wheel with only one good hand left, but this was something that had to be done. The balance between them was a delicate thing, and it needed correction; to maintain it required vigilance and discipline and occasionally sacrifice. They each had to be reminded of their place.


She was likely unconscious now. Her breathing was erratic. Occasionally other vehicles flew past them, briefly illuminating the red horror inside, perhaps the split-second of impact, or his hand slowly pulling back. People see what they want to see. A couple at the roadside, probably making out. Or having an argument, or waiting for friends.


He stopped only after his shoulder refused to work, his muscles completely spent. He could not lift his punching arm. There were hairline fractures along his bones and his elbow was numb from the force of the impact transmitted along his limb.


Her body fell to the side door. He turned her head down so that she would not choke on her blood, letting it stream out. She coughed and sputtered.


They were in this together. He had something he needed to do. She was something he required to do it; she cared for him in his frightened moments, and she forgave him his trespasses. It would be hard to look at her tomorrow, to look at what he had just done. But tonight it was dark, there was no moon, only headlights and the road rising before them. Beyond, in the night sky, city lights rose a glow to the ether, a glow about the horizon where the city lay. They would be there in mere hours, now.


* * *

    It was suggested that the Vicar might attack their capital.
    It was dismissed as an insignificant threat because the war was elsewhere, and their power was concentrated in the capital city.
    This is foreshadowing for people inclined to understand it. This is lost on people who don't.
    There is a box that shows you possible futures. Under closer scrutiny it reveals itself to be a metaphor, using one story to tell another.
    It is a receiver, like a radio. And it picks up imagery from other sources near it on the dial, other stories.
    There actually is a threat of attack, but it comes unregarded in another narrative altogether.
    The box suggests this openly, but it is unrecognized as such.
    The box points to the narrative as metaphor as metaphor.
    The outcome to all of this should come as no surprise, and it will be seen as obvious in retrospect. It was there all along. Only the Dreamers play with masks and subterfuge.
    The Vicar is concerned with bare truth and ruthless revelation.
    His agents of destruction are exactly as they appear; what reads as distressing is due to distress. It is that simple. It is not clever, it is not poetry.
    There is terror in the genuine, raw open communication of being. Not only because revealing yourself makes you vulnerable (and that is frightening for you), but also because what is revealed, unvarnished and ungilded, is the awful bedrock of existence, without niceties or artifice (and that is frightening for others).


The spies, both Black and White, piece this together from their joined information. They send this back to their superior. They themselves are watched by the Gray spy and she takes great pleasure in their flitting espionage. She reports to another. Black and White exist as imperfect echoes of her being. The Vicar is not God, and his spies are copies she recognizes as attempts to reproduce herself. She is one of the few females in this story, and she appears here near the end, because this is a tangled world of words and flawed men; other points of view would not be believed. She turns to you as a Greek chorus, and she tells you most directly:


"This one will kill himself; he is only waiting for the right alignment of circumstance, opportunity, and necessity."


She looks back to the narrative, watching the spies who watch for the Vicar, the eventual loser of his war. Black watches from within Helmson's eyes. White watches from the glaring lights of Joyce's studio. Helmson watches Joyce with pity and envy. His life will never be as exciting nor as dangerous as the younger man's. Joyce watches Helmson with creeping anxiety and disgust. The older man is weak and unaccomplished, without skill or imagination. Helmson will be unable to help him make sense of what threatens and dooms him. He is no adequate mentor, though that is his role. Others watch others, with varying degrees of comprehension. The Vicar watches all that can be seen, which is not quite omniscience. His sigil eye remains wide and unblinking.