The Drought

The drought had ground nastily at the wheel of the earth for two seasons now; it was an unkind, lethal summer unlike any in memory and the elders were desperate to appease the Hanging Bull God. He was a voyeur, dangling there from the sun, hanging from his hoof where he could see and know all. Sex usually did the trick; an orgy on newly plowed fields, on mats atop the temple, or in the shallows of the river.

But no clouds came streaming from his issue, no sweat raining down. The ball of fire rolled across the sky, closer than ever and hotter than hell. But there was simply nothing left to fuck and still the earth crackled and curled up into thick flakes of clay. The well ran dangerously low, the river receded to a muddy dank creek. The crops all died and the cattle sickened.

There was nothing left to fuck and still the Hanging Bull God was unmoved by their desperate, loveless efforts. It was an awful time. There was no love among the people. There was no usual rhythm of courtship and marriage, of union and joy. The priests and the elders had made it plain: their god was displeased and there would be no rain.

It was not long before the rapes began. It was the priests who began it, but then others soon joined them. It began as random and brutal. But then as many fled the village, those that stayed organized themselves; camps were formed. Endless victimization and long dark nights. There was no love in these couplings. Sweat was sponged off the skins of those in rut and saved in jars. The well ran dry shortly after the creek turned to wholly into mud. And there was simply nothing left to fuck.

Those unsuited to such exertion suffered and sickened. Among the very young and the very old, the frail, many died or ran off taking their chances in the desert. One way or another, their numbers dwindled, and those that remained organized themselves further.

In the end, the great Bull God was stirred by what he saw below and the blood ran to his head. He snorted out the first few wisps of vapor and thin clouds were seen upon the horizon, the first in months. Encouraged by this the rapes continued, the wounded were tended to with great care, only to be returned into position. A kind of unthinking barbarism gripped these thirsting people. In the end this must have pleased the Great Lecher for he sounded his chain like thunder and the clouds of his pleasure began to gather in the sky. The horizon was dark with his seed, roiling in vast grey masses. The rains then came. The Hanging Bull God shook violently, thrashing from his length of chain as though to pull down the sun he hung from. He shuddered and the sky shook rim to rim. His sweat fell freely in torrents and it was sweet and divine. He gouged his horns upon the earth and traced out swelling, flooding new rivers.

His sweat fell as rain upon the backs of those driving themselves blindly, mindlessly now. And it fell upon the upturned faces of those worn raw and whose ruined minds had also long since fled in horror. There was no longer any love, no urge to lust, nor the civilizing bonds of affection. There was only the rut and the display. So when the rains fell all collapsed in place and sobbed like the shipwrecked and the rescued at sea.

See now that from this drought come madness and a plague of bastards.